DOCS-219_Draft_Getting Started (#115)
hazelcast/hazelcast-commandline-client: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/get-started.adoc

= Get Started With the Hazelcast CLC

> :description: In this tutorial, you'll learn the basics of how to configure, start up, and connect the Hazelcast Command Line Client (CLC) to a {hazelcast-cloud} cluster. You'll also see how to switch between clusters using the CLC. Finally, you'll perform some basic operations on a cluster from the command line and then by running a script to automate the same actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: In this tutorial, you'll learn the basics of how to configure the Hazelcast Command Line Client (CLC), start it, and connect it to a {hazelcast-cloud} cluster. You'll also see how to switch between clusters, using the Hazelcast CLC. Finally, you'll perform some basic operations on a cluster from the command line and then by running a script to automate the same actions.
```

The comma before 'using' makes it clear that it's the user who does the action not the clusters.

Author: Updated as requested.

{description}

== Before You Begin

You need the following:

> - xref:install-clc.adoc[Hazelcast CLC installed] on your local machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The xref:install-clc.adoc[Hazelcast CLC] installed on your local device.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> - Two xref:cloud:ROOT:create-serverless-cluster.adoc[Serverless clusters]. For this exercise, we'll use one development and one production cluster, to show how you might use the CLC for basic administration and deployment tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Two xref:cloud:ROOT:create-serverless-cluster.adoc[Serverless clusters]. For this tutorial, you'll use one development and one production cluster for basic administration and deployment tasks.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

- Connection credentials and security keys for both clusters.

> TIP: You can find all connection credentials, such as the cluster name and discovery token, and security keys in the {hazelcast-cloud} console. For details, see xref:cloud:ROOT:connect-to-cluster.adoc[]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: You can find all connection credentials, such as the cluster name, discovery token, and TLS certificate files in the {hazelcast-cloud} console. For details, see xref:cloud:ROOT:connect-to-cluster.adoc[]. 
```

Author: Updated as requested.

[[step-1-dev-config]]

> == Step 1. Configure the CLC for a Development Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Step 1. Configure the Hazelcast CLC for a Development Cluster
```

Author: Updated as requested

> Before you can connect the CLC to your development cluster, you need to add the cluster's security keys and connection details to the default configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can connect the CLC to your development cluster, you need to add the cluster's TLS certificate files and connection details to the default configuration file.
```

Author: Updated as requested

> . Save the following security keys to a location on your local machine that's easy to find.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Save the following files to a location that's easy to find on your local machine. For example: `$HOME/.local/share/*dev*`.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

** `ca.pem`
** `cert.pem`
** `key.pem`

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Updated as requested

> For example: `$HOME/.local/share/*dev*`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> . Go to the directory `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` and open `config.yaml`. This is the default configuration file for the CLC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Go to the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory and open the `config.yaml` file. This is the default configuration file for the Hazelcast CLC.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

. Add the following configuration details for your development cluster:
+
[source,yaml]
----
ssl:
  enabled: true

>   capath: "/<PATH>/ca.pem"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  capath: "/$PATH/ca.pem"
```

Reviewer: This is just a convention that most of the docs use for placeholder values.

Please also provide an instruction in this step to direct the user to replace these placeholder values.

Author: Updated as requested.

>   certpath: "/<PATH>/cert.pem"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  certpath: "/$PATH/cert.pem"
```

Author: Updated as requested

>   keypath: "/<PATH>/key.pem"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  keypath: "/$PATH/key.pem"
```

Author: Updated as requested

>   keypassword: "<DEV_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  keypassword: "$DEV_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD"
```

Author: Updated as requested.

hazelcast:
  cluster:

>     name: "<DEV_CLUSTER_NAME>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    name: "$DEV_CLUSTER_NAME"
```

Author: Updated as requested.

    cloud:

>       token: "<DEV_DISCOVERY_TOKEN>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      token: "$DEV_DISCOVERY_TOKEN"
```

Author: Updated as requested

      enabled: true
----
+

> NOTE: Different parameter values are required when connecting to clusters on Hazelcast Platform. See xref:configuration.adoc[] for full details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: This is a tutorial for Serverless. We shouldn't dilute the content with information for other products.

Author: Updated as requested

. Save your changes.

[[step-2-dev-connect]]

> == Step 2. Connect the CLC to the Development Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Step 2. Connect the Hazelcast CLC to the Development Cluster
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> You're ready to connect the CLC to your development cluster. Make sure that the cluster is running before you start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You're ready to connect the Hazelcast CLC to your development cluster. Make sure that the cluster is running before you start.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> . From the command line, change into `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. From the command line, change into the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

. Execute the following command:
+
```bash
hzc
```
+

> The CLC connects to the development cluster and the command prompt displays the cluster details. For example: `hzc hazelcast-cloud@pr-3145>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hazelcast CLC connects to the development cluster and the command prompt displays the cluster details. For example: `hzc hazelcast-cloud@pr-3145>`.
```

Reviewer: Check if the output will continue to include `hazelcast-cloud` even when Serverless beta is launched.

Author: Query is with client team.

. Press kbd:[Ctrl+C] or type 'exit' to shut down the CLC while you complete the configuration for your production cluster.

[[step-3-prod-configure]]
== Step 3. Add Configuration for the Production Cluster

> Now add the security keys and a new configuration file for your production cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now add the TLS certificate files and a new configuration file for your production cluster.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> . Save the security keys for the production cluster to a separate directory on your local machine. For example: `$HOME/.local/share/*prod*`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Save the TLS certificate files for the production cluster to a separate directory on your local machine. For example: `$HOME/.local/share/*prod*`.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> . Return to `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli`, make a copy of `config.yaml` and save it to the same directory. Give the new file a unique name. For example, `config_prod.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Return to the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory, make a copy of the `config.yaml` file and save it to the same directory. Give the new file a unique name. For example, `config_prod.yaml`.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

. Open the new configuration file and update the following parameters with values for your production cluster.
+
[source,yaml]
----
ssl:
  enabled: true

>   capath: "/<PATH>/ca.pem"

Reviewer: Update the format of these placeholder as mentioned in the development cluster section (`$NAME_OF_PLACEHOLDER`)

Author: Updated as requested.

  certpath: "/<PATH>/cert.pem"
  keypath: "/<PATH>/key.pem"
  keypassword: "<PROD_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD>"
hazelcast:
  cluster:
    name: "<PROD_CLUSTER_NAME>"
    cloud:
      token: "<PROD_DISCOVERY_TOKEN>"
      enabled: true
----
. Save your changes.

[[step-4-cluster-switch]]
== Step 4. Switch Between Clusters
Having separate local configurations for your development and production clusters allows you to switch between them without leaving the command line. Make sure both clusters are running before you start.

> . From the command line, change into `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. From the command line, change into the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

. Execute the following command to use the default configuration to connect to your development cluster:
+
```bash
hzc
```
+

> As before, the CLC connects to your development cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As before, the Hazelcast CLC connects to your development cluster.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

. Type `exit` to return to `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli`.
. Execute the following command to use the new configuration file for your production cluster.
+
```bash
hzc -c <config_prod>.yaml
```
+

> The CLC connects to your production cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hazelcast CLC connects to your production cluster.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

[[step-5-write-data]]
== Step 5. Write Data to a Map

> Now that you've connected to both your clusters, try using the CLC to write data to a map on your development cluster. A quick and easy way to do this is to use a JSON file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you've connected to both your clusters, try using the Hazelcast CLC to write data to a map on your development cluster. A quick and easy way to do this is to use a JSON file.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> . Copy the following JSON to a file in the directory `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Copy the following JSON to a file in the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

+
.currencycodes.json
```json
{

>   "1": {

Reviewer: Maybe we should use the currency codes as the keys?

I'm not sure how this works but I assume the `put-all` command uses top-level JSON fields as the keys for the map?

Author: Yes, hoping I can test this at some point soon and make adjustments if necessary. This is the PR for the change: https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast-commandline-client/pull/118

Author: This works as expected, i.e. the top-level JSON fields are used as keys.

        "Code": "CAD",
        "Currency": "Canadian Dollar"
      },
  "2": {
        "Code": "INR",
        "Currency": "Indian Rupee"
      },
  "3": {
        "Code": "MXN",
        "Currency": "Mexican Peso"
      },
  "4": {
        "Code": "GBP",
        "Currency": "Pounds Sterling"
      },
  "5": {
        "Code": "TRY",
        "Currency": "Turkish Lira"
      },
  "6": {
        "Code": "USD",
        "Currency": "United States Dollar"
      },
}

```
. As before, from the command line change into `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli`. This time execute a 'put-all' command to write the data from the JSON file to a new map called `currency`.
+
```bash
hzc map put-all -n currency --json-entry currencycodes.json
```
+
The `-n` flag passes the map name to your cluster.

> Do a quick check on your cluster to make sure that your data has written successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Do a quick check on your cluster to make sure that your data has been written successfully.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> .	Open the dashboard of the development cluster and select *Manage Cluster* > *Management Center*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.	Open the dashboard of the development cluster and click *Management Center*.
```

The UI is changing for Viridian 😄

Author: Updated as requested.

.	Go to *Storage* > *Maps*. You'll see that your cluster has a map called `currency` with six entries. 

[[step-6-query-map]]
== Step 6. Query Map Data
You can use SQL to query the data in your `currency` map.

.	Start by creating a mapping to the `currency` map.

+
```bash

> hzc sql "CREATE MAPPING currency (__key INT, code VARCHAR, currency VARCHAR) TYPE IMap OPTIONS('keyFormat'='int', 'valueFormat'='json-flat')"

Reviewer: I'm not sure that this is correct. The JSON data includes numbered fields as strings. If the `put-all` somehow uses this field as the key, shouldn't the key format be `VARCHAR`?

Author: Yes, you're right. I've updated it.

```
The SQL mapping statement does a number of things:

** Adds column headings for currencies and codes
** Creates a SQL connection to the map
** Tells Hazelcast how to serialize and deserialize the keys and values.

. Try running some simple queries against the `currency` map. For example, this query returns all data in the map and orders it by the currency code.  
+
```bash

> hzc sql "select * from currency order by code"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hzc sql "SELECT * FROM currency ORDER BY code"
```

Reviewer: will need to check the SQL queries for correctness.

Author: Updated as requested.

|__key       |code                |currency            |
+------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|1           |CAD                 |Canadian Dollar     |
|4           |GBP                 |Pounds Sterling     |
|2           |INR                 |Indian Rupee        |
|3           |MXN                 |Mexican Peso        |
|5           |TRY                 |Turkish Lira        |
|6           |USD                 |United States Dollar|
+------------+--------------------+--------------------+

----

[[step-7-automate]]
== Step 7. Automate Actions
When you're ready, combine the commands that you've learned about so far into a shell script and run them from the command line. 

The script first writes the currency data to your development server, queries it and then switches to your production cluster to perform the same actions.

. Copy the commands that you have run in the previous steps into a shell script.
+
.myscript.sh
[source,bash]
----
#!/usr/bin/bash
hzc map put-all -n currency --json-entry currencycodes.json
hzc sql "CREATE MAPPING currency (__key INT, code VARCHAR, currency VARCHAR) TYPE IMap OPTIONS('keyFormat'='int', 'valueFormat'='json-flat')"

> hzc sql "select * from currency order by code"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hzc sql "SELECT * FROM currency ORDER BY code"
```

Author: Updated as requested.

hzc -c config_prod.yaml map put-all -n currency --json-entry currencycodes.json
hzc -c config_prod.yaml sql "CREATE MAPPING currency (__key INT, code VARCHAR, currency VARCHAR) TYPE IMap OPTIONS('keyFormat'='int', 'valueFormat'='json-flat')"

> hzc -c config_prod.yaml sql "select * from currency order by code"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hzc -c config_prod.yaml sql "SELECT * FROM currency ORDER BY code"
```

Author: Updated as requested.

----
.	Save your script to `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli`.

> . To run the script, execute the following command:

Reviewer: Maybe add a step to give the current user permission to execute the script? Users may not be root so it's best to add it to avoid permission errors.

`chmod 777 myscript.sh`

Author: Updated as requested.

= Get Started With the Hazelcast CLC

> :description: In this tutorial, you'll learn the basics of how to configure the Hazelcast Command Line Client (CLC), start it, and connect it to a Hazelcast {hazelcast-cloud} Serverless development cluster and a Serverless production cluster. You'll also see how to switch between clusters, using the Hazelcast CLC. Finally, you'll perform some basic operations on a cluster from the command line and then by running a script to automate the same actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: In this tutorial, you'll learn the basics of how to configure the Hazelcast Command-Line Client (CLC), start it, and connect it to a Hazelcast {hazelcast-cloud} Serverless development cluster and a Serverless production cluster. You'll also see how to switch between clusters, using the Hazelcast CLC. Finally, you'll perform some basic operations on a cluster from the command line and then by running a script to automate the same actions.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

+
```bash
hzc
```
+
As before, the Hazelcast CLC connects to your development cluster.
. Type `exit` to return to `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli`.
. Execute the following command to use the new configuration file for your production cluster.
+
```bash
hzc -c <config_prod>.yaml
```
+
The Hazelcast CLC connects to your production cluster.

[[step-5-write-data]]
== Step 5. Write Data to a Map
Now that you've connected to both your clusters, try using the Hazelcast CLC to write data to a map on your development cluster. A quick and easy way to do this is to use a JSON file.

. Copy the following JSON to a file in the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory.
+
.currencycodes.json
```json
{
  "1": {
        "Code": "CAD",
        "Currency": "Canadian Dollar"
      },
  "2": {
        "Code": "INR",
        "Currency": "Indian Rupee"
      },
  "3": {
        "Code": "MXN",
        "Currency": "Mexican Peso"
      },
  "4": {
        "Code": "GBP",
        "Currency": "Pounds Sterling"
      },
  "5": {
        "Code": "TRY",
        "Currency": "Turkish Lira"
      },
  "6": {
        "Code": "USD",
        "Currency": "United States Dollar"

>       },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      }
```

Otherwise, CLC throws an error:

```
Error: given json map entry file is in invalid format
Details: invalid character '}' looking for beginning of object key string
```

Not sure if this is expected @yuce @utku-caglayan

Reviewer 2: Thanks for letting us now. Your suggestion is the one that complies with json syntax @JakeSCahill. There shouldn't be a semicolon after last element of a json array. Shortly yes, this is an expected error

Author: Updated as requested.

}

```
. As before, from the command line change into the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory. This time execute a `put-all` command to write the data from the JSON file to a new map called `currency`.
+
```bash
hzc map put-all -n currency --json-entry currencycodes.json
```
+
The `-n` flag passes the map name to your cluster.

. Do a quick check on your cluster to make sure that your data has been written successfully.

> .	Open the dashboard of the development cluster and click *Management Center*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Open the dashboard of the development cluster and click *Management Center*.
```

Author: Updated as requested.

> .	Go to *Storage* > *Maps*. You'll see that your cluster has a map called `currency` with six entries. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Go to *Storage* > *Maps*. You'll see that your cluster has a map called `currency` with six entries. 
```

[[step-6-query-map]]
== Step 6. Query Map Data
You can use SQL to query the data in your `currency` map.

> .	Start by creating a mapping to the `currency` map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start by creating a mapping to the `currency` map.
```

Author: Updated as requested

+
```bash
hzc sql "SELECT * FROM currency ORDER BY Code"
```
+
The results look like this:

+
[source,shell]
----
+------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|__key       |Code                |Currency            |
+------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|1           |CAD                 |Canadian Dollar     |
|4           |GBP                 |Pounds Sterling     |
|2           |INR                 |Indian Rupee        |
|3           |MXN                 |Mexican Peso        |
|5           |TRY                 |Turkish Lira        |
|6           |USD                 |United States Dollar|
+------------+--------------------+--------------------+

----

[[step-7-automate]]
== Step 7. Automate Actions
When you're ready, combine the commands that you've learned about so far into a shell script and run them from the command line. 

The script first writes the currency data to a new map called `currencydata` on your development server, queries it and then switches to your production cluster to perform the same actions.

[tabs] 
==== 
Linux:: 
+ 
--
. Copy the following commands into a shell script.
+
.myscript.sh
[source,bash]
----

> #!/usr/bin/bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#!/bin/bash
```

I had to use this shebang on my Mac. Maybe we need to provide another tab for Mac?

Author: Added a new tab as suggested.

hzc -c config_prod.yaml sql "SELECT * FROM currencydata ORDER BY Code"

----

.	Save your script to the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory.
. Use the following command to make sure that the script is executable:
+
```bash
chmod 777 myscript.sh
```
. Then, to run the script, execute the following command:
+
```bash
./myscript.sh
```
--
Windows:: 
+ 
--
. Copy the following commands into a batch file.
+
.myscript.bat
[source,bash]
----
hzc map put-all -n currencydata --json-entry currencycodes.json
hzc sql "CREATE MAPPING currencydata (__key VARCHAR, Code VARCHAR, Currency VARCHAR) TYPE IMap OPTIONS('keyFormat'='varchar', 'valueFormat'='json-flat')"
hzc sql "SELECT * FROM currencydata ORDER BY Code"
hzc -c config_prod.yaml map put-all -n currencydata --json-entry currencycodes.json
hzc -c config_prod.yaml sql "CREATE MAPPING currencydata (__key VARCHAR, Code VARCHAR, Currency VARCHAR) TYPE IMap OPTIONS('keyFormat'='varchar', 'valueFormat'='json-flat')"
hzc -c config_prod.yaml sql "SELECT * FROM currencydata ORDER BY Code"

----

> .	Save your batch file to the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Save your batch file to the `$HOME/.local/share/hz-cli` directory.
```

Author: Updated as requested.
